So today we're going to talk about architecture which at least to me has always been pretty 
inscrutable. Um, and so I'm going to take the approach of just telling you kind of everything, 
right? I'm going to go through all of the modern papers. Um, and we're going to just look through 
what has everyone done. Um, and so I've titled this everything you didn't want to know about 
architectures and hyperparameters because I think we all wished we lived in a world where the only 
things you had to know were like VC dimension or something, right? Like very simple, you know, 
theoretical tools. But that's not really where we are. So okay what we are going to do is we are 
going to try to understand architecture from kind of like a survey lens right the best thing to do 
you know better than listening to this lecture even is for you to go out and like train your own 
models and try different architectures right that's by far the best thing to do that's part of the 
philosophy of the course but we're not going to be able to cover the whole design space of all the 
different architectures that are out there right like that's not something that we have the compute 
or the time to do so my opinion is the second best thing that we could do is to try to learn from 
the experience of others, right? What has what has everyone else done? What are the choices that 
they are making, right? And by looking at kind of a broader somewhat zoomed out picture, maybe we 
can start to understand, oh, these are the kinds of parameters and choices that are sort of fixed 
across all effective architectures and these other ones can be sort of varied without impacting um 
how the model will perform. Right? So I'm going to talk about you know basically transformer 
variants like what is the you know modern transformers starting with you know the Vaswani paper and 
then you know as we go to more modern more recent architectures what do they have in common and 
then what are we allowed to vary or not allowed but what do people vary as they go through this 
right so um I think many of you have taken an NLP course of some kind or at least seen a 
transformer so you've probably seen you know the very vanilla transformer from Pwani at Um, you 
know, there there's some fairly standard choices that you make. You say, "Oh, transformers don't 
have positional dependence, so we're going to add a position embedding." And what do we do? We're 
going to add some signs and cosiness. Um, we're going to have information processing through uh 
relu. Um, and then we're going to have a a postnorm. I'll talk about what exactly that is later. 
Um, and when you look at your assignment, your A1, you're going to notice some differences between 
the standard or the vanilla transformer and what we've asked you to implement. Well, we're going to 
ask you to move the layer norm to the front of each transformer block or the non-residual layers. 
We're going to ask you to implement something called rope. Um, and we're going to ask you to 
implement something called swigloo and not reu, right? Why do we pick these? Um, one reason is 
we've, you know, copied a lot of this over from llama, but so did everyone else. Really, I think if 
you were to train on your own language model, I think you'll quickly run into this question of, oh, 
there's so many choices, right? Like, what do I choose for all these things? And so let's now sort 
of walk through all these different models. The way I kind of think about architectures is to think 
about to look at all the different things people have done and say what are the things that people 
have done? Can we pick and choose from those? Um Percy always makes fun of me for this a little 
bit, but you know I try to look at all the the different models that come out each year to try to 
make this lecture. Um and last year I thought oh there's just a couple papers. It's going to be 
fine. It's going to be fine. And then I looked through all the things and there's a lot of papers. 
There's Quent 2 and GMA 3 and Intern LM2. Um, and then there were even more. There's like Neatron 4 
and Quent 2 and oh my goodness, there were 19 new dense models. And so last year I had my work cut 
out for me. Then this year, you know, I thought, well, there can't be that many new LM releases. 
Like, it's got to be slowing down, right? Like people can't keep training 20 dense LMS per year. 
Um, and that's technically right. There aren't that as many DSLMs. Initially, you know, I was like, 
"Oh, there's Quen 3. GMA 4 just came out last Thursday, so I put that in there. And Elmo 3, you 
know, there's only a couple. And of course, I have to give a shout out to Percy's own 8B model 
trained with Marin. And I was like, oh, we'll just have a few things to cover. Um, but it turns out 
if you start looking, there's a lot of different models. Um, and so the fact that we have so many 
different models, most of these actually are, mixtures of experts, and I'll be talking about that 
tomorrow rather than today. um because we have such a big diversity of models, we actually get a 
pretty good picture of all the different choices that we can make. Um so I I made this like little 
table. We'll come back to this little table at the end of the lecture. Um but basically at this 
point, you know, starting with, you know, the original transformer, there's been actually quite a 
few auto reggressive language models kind of trained on the same class of things. Um, and you can 
ask questions like what are the different vocabulary sizes or what kind of layer norms do we use or 
you know what kind of position embeddings do people use? And we see some fairly clear trends. I'll 
be talking about this as we go. Okay. Um, so the goal here is that we're going to cover a couple 
different things. We're going to cover common architecture variations. So these are different 
building blocks of the transformer. Um, and after we've established what the standard building 
blocks are, like you know, what do we use for the the nonlinearities or what do we use for position 
embeddings, then we're going to talk about hyperparameters. We're going to go down even lower 
detail and say like, you know, what is FFIM? Um, should we make that a multiple of four or like 
multiply the the hidden by four to get FFM? How many vocab elements should I have? Um, and then 
after that, we're going to talk about very low-level tricks of how to get models to train stably. 
And the reason why I'm going to talk about that in this lecture is because these stability tricks 
have a pretty close connection with the architecture variation, right? Um, one of the things that, 
you know, higher level I want to sort of impress upon you is that architectures are actually a very 
complex set of trade-offs, right? Like what does an architecture have to do? Well, it has to learn 
from data. So, it has to generalize. It has to train efficiently on GPUs and it has to not blow up, 
right? like halfway through training if your you know training losses just go like down like this 
and then suddenly blow up that's no good at all right so all these different requirements end up 
getting baked straight into the architecture and that's why these things are a little bit messy and 
a little bit complex um but you should keep that in mind and that's why you know things are in many 
ways not so elegant okay so we're going to start with the core architecture piece and as a highle 
view you know I think the the way that I see a lot of the architect ure stuff you know looking 
basically historically is kind of in the early days of you know starting with a transformer until 
you know GPT3 or so there's a lot of experimentation that happens people try lots of different 
things there's no like gold standard that everyone has unified on and then you know llama 2 comes 
out and everyone's like wow llama 2 is great I want my own llama 2 and so everyone starts training 
llama 2 alikes with you know minor variation um that people have and then finally you know last 
year we saw really big differences or or sort of a trend towards uh architecture modifications that 
make training more stable and this year we see lots of trends towards um architecture variations 
that enable longer context dependence. So there are these big themes that are happening but really 
I think you know you see this like big point l when llama 2 comes out and everyone's like wow I 
want to train some of that and then suddenly or not suddenly but after that people are starting to 
explore once again. So it's kind of cool to see um all these different changes. Okay. Um I think 
people can disagree about a lot of things on architectures but there is one thing that everyone 
agrees on. You know like if you take the transformer paper I think a lot of people say like the 
transformer people got like most of the things right except this. And the thing that they really 
did not get right or like I think most people agree they did not get right is where you put the 
layer norm. Right. So in the original um uh transformer paper you know the layer norm goes in what 
you would call the residual path right? So in the transformer you know you have the residual stream 
this x that kind of runs through the whole network and then you are going to be applying attention 
which you know does some computation and it will add back sort of a delta back into this res 
residual stream. And then in order to make sure that these gradients are sort of stable across 
layers, you know, a layer norm is placed at the end of each of these components. Now um instead of 
putting the layer norms in the residual stream, there's an alternative um I'll refer to this as 
pre-norm um in which you can put the layer norm outside of the residual stream but before each of 
the computations. So you can put it before the multi head attention, you can put it before the FFN, 
right? Um we'll call this prenorm. Um the nomen inclature will get a little bit confusing. Um you 
can call this uh postnorm for now, but let's call this sort of residual norm, right? Because you're 
putting the norm in the residual layer. Um basically all modern language models uh push the layer 
norm outside of the residual stream. This is just like a thing that basically everybody does. Um 
there is one funny exception, but it is op 350mm. And if you all are familiar with sort of language 
models, we kind of know opt in general was, you know, kind of a mess of a language model, right? 
And opt 350mm um is even more so because I don't know why only that model uh has a post layer norm 
in the residual stream. Okay, so this is one of the things that like everyone agrees on. And so you 
might wonder like why is this like such a you know uh uni like a uni unified thing across all the 
different models. Um and if you look at some of the early works studying like where do you place 
the layer norm style research um what you really see is that you know the early motivation for a 
lot of this was when you train a transformer you need to do a warm-up. actually, you know, modern 
transformer training still does warm up as well, but you definitely need to do warm-up when you 
train. Now, wouldn't it be nice if we could remove the warm-up, right? So, that was kind of the 
initial motivation for a lot of this research. Um, but people quickly realized that removing the 
warm-up had very serious issues in terms of the stability and convergence um of these things, 
right? So, if you did uh postnorm plus layer, which is, you know, basically the original 
transformer thing, you got this purple dash line. Oh, you just don't converge as well. Um, compared 
to doing something like prenorm, you can ignore the other uh terms. You would get much nicer 
convergence even without warm-up. Right? So, this was the original motivation. But really what 
people kind of quickly realized is that, you know, moving the layer norms outside the residual 
stream has some pretty important implications as you make your network deeper and as you start to 
grapple with stability issues. Um to me I think the gradient attenuation issues are kind of the 
most clear. Um, when you sort of talk to people who do architecture design, I'm not really one of 
the the people that deeply engages in this, but one of the things that people often say is keep 
your residual stream clean, right? So, in this case, you have your X's coming in from the bottom on 
the prenor side, and this X propagates all the way up to the top, right? All the way up to your 
your final output. And that allows gradients to propagate if in the backward pass straight through 
this, right? Um, that makes gradient propagation very simple. um which improves both stability and 
signal propagation. And that's sort of what people realized very very quickly that if you do 
something like porm in blue at initialization sort of the gradient sizes kind of remains the same, 
right? Because you have this nice straight through propagation in the backward pass. On the other 
hand, if you have post layer norm, you have these kind of complicated effects that happen because 
you're layerorming each time you're going through a transformer block and that's going to change 
the norm of your gradients as you go backwards through. So you can kind of see, you know, from the 
principle of keep your residual stream clean that porm makes a lot of sense. Um people also 
realized through experimentation that this also improves stability in general that the sizes and 
frequencies of gradient spikes um were improved under pre-orm compared to postnorm and you know 
this is a figure from Salazar and Yen who were one of the first ones I think to to study this 
phenomena carefully and I think this is the reason why it stuck around right um stability and the 
ability to go deep are both very very important for modern large language models and so this idea a 
of moving your layer norm outside of the residual stream is one that basically everyone um has 
adopted. Um so now you know if putting layer norms in residual streams is bad um why does layer 
norm have to be at the start of course we have pre-orm which is you know before our computation but 
we could have it after computation as well right that's equally good at least under that lo logic 
um and that's exactly right um many recent models like grock or gemma 2 or mo 2 um have this 
structure where they've moved the layer norm after the computation um so it's a postnorm of a but 
it's outside the residual stream. Um, other models still actually just put layer norms everywhere. 
They put a layer norm here, they put a layer norm after. Um, I'll get to this later as we talk 
about stability. But one of the other lessons that it seems to have held up very well is if you 
have stability issues, you can kind of sprinkle in layer norms everywhere. Um, and that will 
generally improve stability. Um, it's almost very strange to be saying this because it's so 
ridiculous. And yet that statement has actually been proven right. every time you know people have 
encountered stability issues they say oh but what if we just throw a layer norm into attention 
turns out that works too we'll get to that later so okay that's postnorm um or double norm in this 
case where you have two layer norms here okay the other thing that you can do is in the original 
transformer you have the layer norm which is this operation right here so you have your activations 
x um you're going to mean subtract divide the variance and then scale it back up right um and this 
works just fine right it's not like this is long um and many models have successfully trained on 
this scheme. Um but basically most or all modern models I think um use RMS norm which doesn't 
subtract the mean or add a bias term right so it's just a scaling down and scaling back up right so 
you can see this in the equation here um and really layer norm is more expressive than RMS norm so 
there's really representationally no reason why you have to use RMS norm but RMS norm is nice 
because in practice um there's really no expressiveness loss RMS norm models just as well as layer 
norm but more importantly it is you know faster right this is the part where kind of the systems 
and sort of architecture codees starts to come in Percy mentioned you know in the previous lecture 
this idea of arithmetic intensity right we want to keep our GPUs hot by doing you know matrix 
multiplies and other very intense computations we do not want to be wasting our GPUs by having them 
move little tiny bits of memory back and forth right that's a very inefficient use of are you know 
very powerful GPU and so what we want is to remove operations that are small and involve memory 
movement but don't give us much expressive power right so by that view what we really want to be 
doing here is you know if the mean subtraction and addition isn't really doing much for us just get 
rid of it right um you might think okay why does this matter we're just optimizing this teenytiny 
operation that accounts for you know in this case something like.17% of the total floatingoint 
operations of our system. But you know, as Percy mentioned, it's not really about the flops, right? 
The flops are the the floatingoint operations we do. That's sort of multiplying matrices, but 
that's not runtime, right? Runtime is a much more complicated object. And you know, statistical 
normalizations, things like layer norms, even though they're only 0.17% of the flops, depending on 
your workload and depending on the setup, can be up to 25% of the runtime, right? That's kind of 
crazy. On tiny models, this can be really, really big because you're still having to move all these 
parameters back and forth from fast to slow memory and vice versa um when you're doing these 
operations. So data movement is really really important. Um and RMS norm can still matter a lot 
because of this, right? So um you can see kind of the difference here. Um the arithmetic intensity 
is in white and then you can kind of see the flops involved in black and you see that layer norm 
has a very low arithmetic intensity which is the operation we try to want to remove as much as 
possible. Yeah question over there movement for normalization so disproportionate compared to like 
contraction. So for something like tensor contraction which is in this case matrix multiplies um 
the majority of the workload is you know multiplying whereas for stat normalization the majority of 
the workload is memory movement and memory movement is quite slow. So imagine the case where like 
moving something is like almost all the compute then you're still paying quite a bit here right 
because activations can be quite large. Yeah I think the percent runtime in this case is quite 
extreme. This is like in the you know tiny models with like matrices that don't really generally 
make sense in modern workloads but this is you know giving you a sense of why this is a free 
optimization. Um and you do see this right this is another paper in which people were um evaluating 
different architecture intervention they're on get all in 2020 um I think this was a Google paper 
and they show you know for teenytiny transform of a 200 million parameters you get more steps per 
second that's the third column over here when you switch to RMS norm um and in fact you actually 
get better performance which I don't think is is something that you're guaranteed um but it's a 
nice bonus regardless right so you get a free systems win um by just moving to RMSORM and so 
basically everyone has has decided to move over to this now. And in general, um, there's a more 
general version of this. There's no guarantee to any of the things I'm saying, but biased terms in 
transformers and neural networks are generally not that useful. So, in the original transformer, 
the linear terms all have biases. Um, but most implementations actually just drop the biases 
entirely. Right? Once again, this is another example of something that's not very arithmetically 
intense, but fairly memory uh intensive. relatively speaking. And so you might as well just drop 
these, right? And get the free systems win. Um there's also some cases, I'll just mention this 
offhand, where the bias terms can also induce stability issues. So they're useful in other ways, 
but really I think the primary reason these are dropped is just to simplify things from the systems 
perspective. Cool. Okay. So I think layer norms, the story is pretty easy. Um it's easy in the 
sense that what people do is fairly standardized. Our our understanding not at like a deep 
theoretical level but our understanding of like what layerorm does is fairly good right? Everyone 
moves the layer norm outside the residual stream. Um often pre-orm but I think this might partially 
be because llama 2 did that. Um and we roughly have a sense of how to use layer norm to control 
things like um gradient spikes um and keep signal propagation nice. Related to that we also now you 
know basically always use RMS norm and you hopefully understand the general principles here um of 
basically just dropping bias terms and that allows us to to keep our system more arithmetically 
intense um while keeping the expressive power the same. Um I think the unsatisfying thing about a 
lot of architectures is that you know you can't really reason about this beforehand right like we 
don't know beforehand that dropping the bias terms is okay but from a lot of experimentation and 
now collectively acquired knowledge we roughly know that dropping the bias terms on both the linear 
and RMS norm is okay for typical language modeling workloads right um this is the kind of statement 
that we can make on the basis of of what we do when we look at a variety of different models okay 
any questions uh for layer norm Good. Okay. So, now I'm going to talk about activations. Um, and 
there's a whole zoo of activations. There's just a lot, right? There's relu, gelu, swish, lu, 
gaggloo, cellu, swigloo, lilu. Um, and what are these things? Um, I think at one point, one point 
of my, you know, more stats ML training, I thought to myself, I will never learn these things. I 
will make it a point of pride to never know what a swiggloo is. Um but now it's actually very 
important for us to to actually like have a general sense of what these objects are um and which 
parts of these names actually kind of matter for performance, right? Um so you can build and train 
a language model on just a fairly vanilla activation. Um even you know I guess chinchilla is 
probably the best model out of that group but even if you just want to relue you you know you can 
train a reasonably performant language model using just that activation. There's nothing wrong with 
that, right? And if we move to GLU, which is a Gausian error unit and really the only difference is 
this tiny divot at the bottom here, which really, you know, for the most of the activation doesn't 
change anything but changes the gradients right near zero. Um, then you can train models like GPT3, 
right? That's a perfectly good large language model. Not, you know, modern by modern standards, but 
perfectly fine. Um but then you know we get to the gated linear units like swiggloo and giggloo and 
these are really where most of the action is. You know this is very similar to layer norm in that I 
think almost all credible modern language models use a gated linear unit of some kind. Okay so what 
is a gated linear unit? So these are gated activations. So if we want to look at something like a 
feed forward layer um we can just look at this first bar. This is you know a very standard rel feed 
forward right I have my X I hit it with a W1 you know I I entry Y threshold at zero and then I hit 
it with another W2 I get my output right very straightforward network um another thing um I don't 
say this as my personal experience but another thing that is often said in architecture design is 
that gating is often very helpful so if you apply that very general heruristic what you might get 
is to say okay well instead of just having you know this entry-wise rel why don't we also have a 
gate and the second gate this second term here this is just going to multiply the output of my relu 
entry-wise and I have a second matrix V okay now this is just going to modulate the output of my 
rel um and then I'm going to do everything else the same right so instead of you know just having 
xw1 w2 I have xw1 and I'm going to gate that with xv this is another uh activation the same sizes 
this and then I'm going to you know down project it back with W2. Okay. So what is this now? This 
is a reglue. This is uh you you make these names by adding the first activation in this case relu 
and glu right the relu gated linear unit. Um and gating has been a you know very effective other 
primitive in architecture design and it turns out that this is very effective in language modeling 
as well. So um if you take something like a gel, we've already talked about that, right? That's 
like the relu but with a little divot at the bottom here. Um you will get a gaggloo. Um and if you 
take a swigloo, which is x times a sigmoid, then you will get a swigloo. So this is a swish times, 
you know, the rest of it. Um and this really covers a lot of the modern models, right? Um generally 
the Google folks have used giggloo. So like the GMA models, the T5 models are those. Um, and 
everything that's kind of like a llama descendant uses a swigloo. Um, so palm and the llama 
descendants are all kind of swiggloo models. Um, I would say that swigloo is probably the more 
dominant one, but honestly amongst the gated units doesn't really matter. Now here's a side note 
that will uh be a semiimportant piece of trivia later. Um, if you look up here, right? um you will 
notice that there are more parameters for the gated uh model, right? Because I have this parameter 
V. And so if you do a little bit of math, right, I now have three matrices instead of two matrices, 
right? What you should do is you should maybe use a smaller feed forward dimension by a factor of 
2/3 in order to keep the total parameter count the same. Right? So this is roughly the idea of well 
I want to keep the same number of total parameters as my original MLP but I now want to make it 
gated. So I'm going to make the feed forward dimension which is the output dimension of this W a 
little bit smaller by 2/3. Right? So this is a general rule of thumb that people have followed but 
it's not really an iron rule. um you know the original Numm Shazir paper that you know proposed 
this um had some you know very small deltas originally but they're consistent deltas and I think to 
his credit um I think a lot of his papers have these like error bar assessments of like training 
multiple replicates and checking to see if they're better um and if you look the GLU variants are 
almost always consistently better than the nonglu variants and this is a parameter matched 
comparison because um Nome Shazir is always doing this twothirds adjustment to make sure that all 
of the models have the total same total number um of parameters. So this is quite nice. It's in 
some ways a free win. Um almost everyone uses a GLU. There are there have been other sort of more 
controlled systematic comparisons. This is uh the same paper I was talking about before Nang at all 
in 2020. Um Google actually in the 2020s did quite a few nice largecale architecture comparison 
papers um although with a T5 architecture and not uh auto reggressive uh language model um and they 
you know basically comprehensively compare things like GLUs and you see once again um if we look at 
the swigloo or the glo or the glus in general they do significantly better at loss or the other 
downstream metrics right fairly compelling on p on these papers also clear from Now a lot of model 
training runs that swigloo and glu are good right so there's a lot of variations in gating but 
really the important single axis to know is that gating uh for these nonlinearities is actually 
quite important gives you uh nice boost without much of a computational cost um you know that's not 
to say that gated linear units are necessary I mean GPT3 was that um I think the Neimotron 340B 
model used a squared relu which is a kind of but crazy choice, but that works too. Um, both of 
these models are perfectly performant, but it's actually quite rare to see anything that's not 
trained on a gated linear unit, right? So, evidence is pointing towards consistent gains on using 
these gating tricks. Okay, so those are, I think, the the more consensus choices for things that we 
can do in architecture. Um, now this one I think is a really fun idea, but one that I think now the 
test of time has shown maybe is not quite as good or maybe not as popular of an idea. Um, normally 
we do our transformer blocks serially, right? We compute our attention, then we compute the MLP, 
right? One after the other. Um, if you're very systems minded, you might say, well, this introduces 
a bottleneck, right? I have to wait for the computation of one to do the other. If they were 
instead in parallel, I could bring to bear some new and cool systems optimizations potentially. 
Right? So you might ask, could we parallelize the transformer block? And um this was originally an 
idea that was in GPTJ, which is the open-source attempted replication of GPT3. Um and kind of very 
interestingly, I think GPTJ has been surprisingly influential in sort of propagating a lot of 
ideas. I mean Palm as well. Google um is actually surprisingly bold with the architectures that 
they do. Um but the description in uh Palm uh which you can see in their report is kind of the 
following. Instead of nesting this which is the sequential form at the top, you know, you're just 
going to add together the output of the MLP and the attention layer and just add both of those back 
into the residual stream. Um, if you implement this right, you can actually share a lot of the 
components like you can share the layer norms, you can fuse the matrix multiplies. This allows you 
to potentially get additional systems optimizations. Um, and I think a lot of the people that have 
been influenced by Google, so Coher, you know, was founded from one of the former uh, transformer 
authors. They do a lot of Google inspired optimizations. They followed kind of this architecture. 
Um, but not very many others. Um this has been a approach that has really fallen out of popularity 
over the past I think two years. Um I think mainly because optimization of the serial form has 
gotten sufficiently good that the systems gains from the second one just isn't worth the small hits 
to uh representation power that you end up getting going from uh parallel to serial. Effectively 
you can think about it as you've lost half of your depth, right? And that can be uh a dilitterious 
uh thing to do to your model. Okay, so in terms of the architecture things actually you know the 
fact that this is so short should kind of suggest to you how much the original transformer for 
formulation has somewhat stood the test of time right because the only thing I'm really talking 
about changing here um is you know where the norms go or you know whether we have bias terms or 
whether we gate the MLPS but those are actually pretty minor changes compared to all the things 
that you can do now uh those of you that are, you know, sort of carefully paying attention might 
say, "But wait, you know, there's a lot of transformer alternatives that change the attention." Um, 
yes, you'll have to wait until next lecture because today I'm just only going to cover sort of core 
attention based methods. Um, and next lecture I'll throw in a little bit of uh state space model 
stuff. But as long as you're in this like dense attention land, actually the architecture from the 
original transformer paper is pretty close to what we do. So you see uh quite a bit of this, right? 
So uh just now going back to this blue here is RMS norm black is layer norm. You see most of the 
modern models are sort of RMS norm models serial versus parallel layers. The blue one's parallel 
the rest is serial. You see mostly serial layers. Um p-orm versus postnorm. Some of these uh ones 
that I marked as postnorm are actually pre and postnorm. Um and then these ones on the right, these 
are GLUs uh almost always with the exception of things like uh Falcon which use a gated linear unit 
but almost all of these are really uh gated linear units for modern models. So you can see the 
trends quite visually um from what I'm telling you. Okay. So really the thing that is very 
different across implementations and I think a place where a lot of the architecture stuff is still 
in flux is how you do kind of position dependence and incorporate information from other positions 
right so the core attention component in some sense um so there are lots of different ways that you 
can encode position into a transformer and just you know to to remind you right this is very very 
important because attention is positionally independent right they're just inner products. So you 
can just shuffle them and attention would be the same if you don't have a position embedding. The 
original transformer had sign and cosine embeddings kind of like a forier transform intuition that 
if you have signs and cosiness then you can kind of recover position from that no matter what. Um a 
number of other sort of large models that you know followed soon after that used absolute 
embeddings where each position had its own different embedding. Um and then uh several other sort 
of Google models like to use relative embeddings. And here you're not adding um embeddings into the 
into the embedding uh like word vector embeddings, but instead you're adding a vector to the 
attention computation itself. Right? So if you're three positions off sort of the attention matrix 
gets a different offset added to it. And and you know models like T5 and Chinchilla use kind of 
this scheme. Um the thing that has really become pretty dominant in terms of position embedding is 
this class of embeddings called rope which some of you may be familiar with um most models past 
2024 use this type of embedding and it's kind of remarkable given that rope you know in some ways 
came out of nowhere um originally I think this was also a GPTJ innovation um from I think a a sort 
of not very well-known sort of blog post and paper combination uh from an author in China. Um, but 
really it has some really interesting ideas for for why you would do something like rope. So rope, 
you know, is a relative position embedding. And a relative position embedding, let's make an 
opinionated stance that I should not care about the absolute position of any words. So if you know 
a uh and apple appear together even if it appears at the start or at the end right in rope 
embeddings they should kind of get the same uh sort of result. Um and we do know that you know or 
and we want to sort of represent it in this way, right? So I have an embedding f and I have another 
embedding f and these are going to take in the identity of the words x and y and the positions 
absolute of i and j and I want this to be equal if I take the inner product of these embeddings to 
be equal to a function that only depends on the relative difference. Right? um and every existing 
embedding before it didn't really fulfill this equality. Like sign is not relative because it has 
these absolute cross terms that are not relative. Absolute position embeddings just by the the name 
of it is obviously not relative. And then relative embeddings technically these are relative but 
they're not kind of embeddings because they're just adding to the attention matrix, right? So 
there's no inner product structure that you know you can extract out of this guy. So given this you 
might ask is there a nice way that we can truly have this relative embedding and the idea is very 
cool. Um it's really just looking at kind of uh properties about angles and cosiness. So we want 
our embeddings to be invariant to absolute positions and we know that inner products of any kind 
are invariant to arbitrary rotation. Right? So the idea is to say I'm going to take my semantic 
word vectors, the ones that are independent of any position. So this is my starting point and then 
I'm going to rotate each of these vectors in this case in 2D um based on the position that the 
words appear. So you know just as a uh simple example we let's say we have the uh sentence we know 
that right we appears at position zero. So I'm not going to touch that at all. Right? I'm just 
going to keep that where it is. The word no is at position one. So I'm going to rotate it by some 
angle, right? And that's my my one position rotation. Now what happens if I apply the same idea to 
uh the following sequence? Of course we know, right? In this case, we and no are still adjacent. 
They're right next to each other, but their absolute position has shifted, right? Of course, you 
know, comes before we know. Now in this case I'm going to rotate the word we by two positions 
because it's two index right 0 1 2. So the word we is in the second uh position number two. So I 
rotate by two. I rotate no by three positions because it's in position number three. And what do 
you know the relative angle between these two is still separated by one. Right? So this is a very 
very simple idea of just using rotations uh to represent um position. And if we do that, then 
anytime we take a inner product, those inner products are going to be invariant of absolute 
positions. Now, you might say, well, in two dimensions, that's pretty easy because you've only 
really got one choice. You got clockwise and counterclockwise. But in high dimensions, there's an 
infinite space of ways that you can rotate vectors. So, what do you do in Dimensions? Um, well, you 
do the simplest possible thing, and it works. The simplest possible thing is to reduce it to the 2D 
case repeatedly. So you have a d- dimensional vector just cut it up into chunks of two and each 
pair of two dimensions gets rotated and the theta at which these things rotate vary right some of 
them are very low frequency so they rotate very slowly so they uh they can capture long range 
dependence some of them rotate very quickly so they capture things like are they neighbors to each 
other right um and then at the end you know after I've rotated every pair of vectors I get sort of 
my final embedding so this is the you rope approach. Um the paper if you read it has a very complex 
motivation about complex numbers but really I think the intuitive way at least to me to think about 
it is to just you want to rotate by reducing to the two-dimensional case and you're just rotating 
every pair of coordinates. Um, GMA 4 just came out on Thursday and they have like another different 
kind of fun thing that they do which they call um I think proportional rope or P rope um which is a 
really strange way to just say that the only thing they rotate is the first two coordinates but 
that's another valid thing that you can do as well. So there's a lot of different things that you 
can do in this space that ends up working. Okay, in practice, what you're going to end up doing is, 
you know, you can take your vector and you can make a sparse multiply with ss and cosiness. And 
this is going to be giving you some way of rotating your input vectors x's, right? So x * uh w * r. 
This is going to be your final embedding that you get. Okay. Um, and finally, you know, this is a s 
and cosine, which looks a little like s embeddings, but it's really important that I'm multiplying 
with these signs and cosiness rather than using them as embeddings because that means that there 
are no cross terms. Um, and this is purely relative, right? There's no absolute position 
information that you'll get out of inner products. Um, if we really really wanted to get into 
low-level details and you ask like how do I actually implement this thing, you know, you're going 
to have to do that. um you have your usual attention stuff and then what you do is you generate 
cosine and sign angles um based on the position ids of sort of where your sequence is and then 
you're going to apply those cosiness and signs onto both your queries and keys for your sort of 
attention computation. Um and you can either apply them as a matrix multiply or you can go through 
and apply them manually uh just as a rotation, right? fairly straightforward and you would do this 
at the attention level rather than at the very bottom to sort of enforce position invariance every 
time you're doing attention computations. Okay, so that was rope. Um it is a little bit confusing 
but once you understand the geometry of just rotating things, it's actually fairly uh 
straightforward. Okay, I'm going to pause here for one moment um in case anyone has questions about 
the various like architecture bits. Um we're going to then talk about even lower level details 
about hyperparameters. So yes, >> do you know about any papers that do a higher dimensional 
rotation? >> Higher dimensional rotation work. >> That's a good question. I don't think so. By a 
higher dimensional rotation like any, you know, 2D rotation in the space would just be kind of a 
variant of this. You could certainly do like any one manifold that like is a closed loop. I have 
not seen that. >> Yes. What do you think is the best way to distill this kind of knowledge from 
papers or technical reports? >> It's a good question. Um I don't know if there's a way beyond some 
combination of like looking broadly enough to get us get a pattern which is what the procedure I'm 
trying to do in this lecture here. And then the other one is to try it yourself even a much smaller 
scale to form an intuition and like a theory for how these things come together. I think those two 
are really the right ways. I think reading any single paper in isolation is very very difficult 
especially now because no single paper seems to give any full detail for a lot of language models 
these days. Oh, lots of questions now. Okay, good. We'll go in. Yeah. >> Uh so I have a question. I 
have a question on the parallel layers and the zero layers. Yeah, I understand the the modern 
models thinking of the resource dependency. So they will use the parallel layers. Yeah, but yeah, 
but there's a there's a different there's a there's a difference between between accuracy um for 
these two patterns, right? I want to know like what's the what's the diff of of accuracy? Is it big 
enough to is it small enough to allow the model trainers to ignore that or is any >> Yeah, I think 
you know the that's actually really mixed. So if you read the original Palm paper, I think they're 
like very confident about the use of parallel layers. Like no performance drop, 15% systems 
utilization improvement. So if you read just that, you'll kind of say like, oh, it's just as good. 
Um, but I think a lot of the the later Google models have stopped using this, which you can take on 
as an implicit signal that actually there might be some uh losses. And once again, this one is a 
little bit hard to um to get precise numbers on because no one's done the ablations as far as I 
know on parallel versus serial um controlled nice ablations at least. >> Yeah. >> What's the 
difference between like Pope and RO? >> Yeah. Yeah. I mean it this difference is really just like 
which of the coordinates you rotate >> like you don't rotate most of them because a lot of the I 
mean the argument originally I think is that the low frequency parts just aren't rotating very much 
and so you can drop them if you're really strapped for you know sort of extra space and these this 
is really optimization for teenytiny models where like you don't have very much like hidden 
dimensions to to have activations for >> for the relative embedded things not having an inner 
product. Um, is that cuz it only applies to keys basically? I was trying to understand. >> Yeah. 
So, they apply both to the keys and values which is kind of why you know you get this like relative 
effect from where you are. Um, you want to not have cross terms, right? Okay. So, so if you look at 
the sign and cosine embeddings, then you'll not only get sort of the, you know, the original 
vectors, you'll kind of get these weird cross terms between the position embeddings and the word 
embedding themselves and so on and so forth. And then you can kind of back out what the absolute 
position is. So even s and cosine embeddings are not like pure relative position embeddings. Um you 
know you have to accept the premise that you know the relative embedding is what you want but once 
you do kind of you end up at the rope solution somewhat naturally >> what's the issue >> so the 
issue with this is that it just can't be factorized as >> that's more of an aesthetic problem right 
like if if your constraints are I need it to be uh relative and I need it to factoriize as f of x i 
and f of YJ, then this is not a solution in that class. Um to be fair, there's a lot of um 
embeddings that work this way that do work like alibi and other kinds of like approaches like do do 
this kind of inject into the attention matrix and they do reasonably well. Um it's not necessarily 
the one that's become the dominant approach is what I can say. Cool. Okay, great. Okay, now I'll 
talk about hyperparameters. Um, and I think hyperparameters are really something that you start to 
engage with once you like actually have to train a model, right? When your knowledge about language 
models are abstract, you don't have to care about any of these. But once you have to instantiate 
it, you start to ask questions like, well, how big should the feed forward size be? Um, how many 
heads should I have? Um, what should my vocab size be? Right? Um, and you might also have questions 
of like, what should my weight decay or dropout be? Like, do I even need to regularize? I have a 
lot of tokens, right? Okay, so do I need regularization? Um, and do I need very deep models or very 
wide models? Like what are the the right kinds of things to do here? Right? Um, and all of these if 
you start out with no knowledge is actually very daunting because you have to search this like very 
big highdimensional space. Um, but the space of things that people try is actually pretty small. 
And from that maybe you can start to think about, you know, smarter search processes of like where 
you want to vary things. Um, one of the things that's a really consensus hyperparameter, um, is 
this idea of the, uh, ratio between the feed forward size, which is kind of the output of your 
first matrix multiply in an MLP, and the model dimension, right? So, this is really the the uh 
ratio of the two dimensions of your W1 and your as well your W2 matrix. Um, this seems like a thing 
that's very important and controls kind of the richness of your MLPS. So, what should it be? Well, 
for whatever reason, it should maybe be four times your hidden dimension, right? Um, and this is a 
rule of thumb that works remarkably well. And I will show you some data on like why maybe this is a 
fine number to choose. There's a few exceptions. Um, and funnily enough, the really extreme 
exceptions kind of backtrack on that. Okay. Um, exception number one is variance of the gated 
linear unit. I already told you about this. So if you were thinking about it, this is probably 
cached in your head, right? GLUs have more parameters, right? If you keep the same dimensions. So 
if you want to keep the parameter size of your MLPS the same, well, you need to scale down by 2/3, 
right? So most GLU variants, this means that you're going to end up with something like 2.67ish, 
right? So everyone that's uh down here, 2.67 67 to 2.5. This is roughly applying this like 2/3 
correction. Um and then for whatever reason um the llama 2 folks decided well we actually have very 
efficient um attention heads with like um uh MQA which I'll talk about later. Um and because of 
that we can multiply this ratio by an arbitrary 1.33 and we'll get roughly 3.5. And so the llama 
people kind of like arbitrarily chose a slightly different ratio which essentially emphasizes the 
MLPS a little bit more. Um but really if you actually look through all of the the papers you'll 
find you know either 2.6ish or 3.5 for GLUs um or four if you're doing uh nonglu models. Okay. 
There's another exception which I find to be very funny but also very very cool which is um you 
know throughout as you read these like technical reports you'll find that most people are just very 
boring in their choice of architectures. They're like we did llama but we changed one thing. Um but 
you know folks at Google are very bold sometimes. Um and T5 is one of my favorite ones because they 
have some really bold settings. uh they decided that um instead of following this like 4x rule of 
thumb, they decided that they want to have a 64x uh multiplier which is like way bigger than four. 
Um and they have a reasonable argument for this as well. This is another like systemsbased 
argument, right? They said, well, you know, if the bigger my matrix multiplies, the more efficient 
I can keep my hardware. So if I make this you know multiplier really big then you know my matrix 
multiplies can potentially be sort of more efficiently utilized right. Um and some others like 
gamma 2 have also tried to really push a little bit higher on this but really uh T5 is an kind of 
astounding exception at 64. I don't think any other model has really gone that high in the feed 
forward multiplier. Um and empirically if you look at other sort of works that try to do more 
controlled comparisons of this ratio um I've taken this one from Kaplan in 2020. This is the 
classic uh neural scaling loss paper um where they they do sort of various controlled uh studies on 
language models. You'll see, you know, this wasn't the point of the study, right? It was a scaling 
loss study, but you'll see in one of the panels that they actually have a sort of ablation or sweep 
where they change the feed forward ratio and they look at the loss, right? Um, for a very small 
model here, right? But what they what they find in this paper is there's a basin where you start at 
about one and you end about maybe 10 where this hyperparameter is like pretty good and very very 
flat. You lose very little relative to the optimal loss down here, right? Um, and then if you get 
it really wrong, like you get, you know, above 10 to 100 or something like that, you know, then 
your loss starts really shooting up quadratically. Um, and so a lot of these choices that range 
between like 2.6 to four, they're all kind of falling into this relatively nice basin. So you're 
fine choosing those numbers, right? Okay. So what can we learn about this hyperparameter? Well, the 
default choices have worked very well for nearly all modern language models. So you can safely 
choose that. um T5 was a fine model or the version one T5 was a fine model, right? Like it wasn't a 
bad model. Um and so even radical choices can technically work, but it's probably going to be 
compute inefficient. And I think the funniest part of this saga, this is kind of the punchline of 
the T5 saga to me is that they have a follow-up model, T51 V1.1, um that's like supposed to be the 
improved version of T5 and they kind of go back to the standard 2.5 multiplier, you know. So 
there's nothing explicitly stated here, but clearly, you know, when they tried to to update T5, 
they decided that they wanted to go back to a more standard multiplier, which I find to be a little 
bit funny. Okay, so that's the, you know, feed forward ratio. Um, which now you have like a rough 
sense of like what the right order of magnitude is. Now let's talk about a different consensus 
hyperparameter. Um I always found this to be very strange when sort of teaching uh 224N and you 
know just sort of teaching students about this which is if you have a multi-head attention where 
you have multiple heads for your attention in your transformer um the canonical thing to do the 
thing that almost everyone does is if you have multiple heads you make sure that the size of those 
heads the head dimension is such that you sort of have the same dimension as a single head 
transformer right so you always make sure that you sort of divide the hidden dimension to basically 
multiply with h. So in this case, right, you have h the number of heads and the dimension of each 
head is d over h. So you multiply the two and you get d, right? For some reason, this is kind of 
the rule of thumb. Um, of course, this doesn't have to be true. We can arbitrarily change the the 
ratios between head dimensions and model dimensions, but most models do follow this guideline, and 
it turns out to work pretty well. Um, you know, we can look at a variety of different models, 
classic and new. I you know have the latest and greatest quen as well and you kind of find yeah the 
ratios are roughly around one model head um you know notable exception of T5 um and even lambda 
which is another Google model um but really everyone sticks around one and I think this is kind of 
an interesting one um I think the thing about head dimensions uh that I'll that I'll end with here 
is I think this is yet another kind of forgiving hyperparameter um there's a couple ablations that 
people have done there's once again a pretty wide basin around one that you can sort of get away 
with. Okay, but that one's maybe not the most critical uh hyperparameter. I think maybe one of the 
most critical and interesting ones I think conceptually is this idea of an aspect ratio, right? Um 
and sort of to add an extra point here um when you scale models up or down, the way you usually do 
that is you fix an aspect ratio like how wide your model is versus how deep it is and then you make 
the whole model bigger. Right? So the aspect ratio in some sense controls the entire depth to width 
trade-off as you make models bigger. Right? Now you might wonder how deep should my model be? Like 
if you've been following all this stuff on like reasoning and so on, you might think I need a 
really deep model or really shallow model if I want systems utilization. You might think that 
there's a lot of sort of variation. And there is a lot of variation um much more so than other 
hyperparameters. But there's actually like a fairly clear sweet spot that most modern models fall 
into. um you don't really see models go like too uh too deep um and you also don't see models go 
too wide uh in either direction right you see most models have a ratio about 100 um dmodel over n 
layers um so about 100 sort of width for every layer that you have and this is true for like GPT3 
or llama or any one of these models um and really I think the considerations are partly a trade-off 
between expressive and hardware, right? If you have an extremely extremely deep model, um they get 
very very annoying to deal with systems wise. The deeper your model, like what is the ways that you 
have for paralyzing them, well, you might have to cut up your layers. If you cut up your layers, 
we'll talk about this in the systems lecture. Once you start cutting up your layers um depthwise, 
you have very serious issues in parallelization. Pipeline parallel, which is what this is called, 
is something that like most people really really do not want to deal with. Whereas width is much 
easier to paralyze if you have a really wide model. You know, you can cut that up very easily in 
your GPUs. Uh tensor parallel is what it's called is much much simpler to deal with. Um and so in 
some sense, you know, there's systems reasons to go wide and maybe there's expressiveness reasons 
to go deep and you end up at roughly 100. Um, and I think one of the really interesting things 
about um, transformer hyperparameters is there are a lot of hyperparameters that seem quite 
important, but they're also fairly forgiving and people have converged roughly on the minimum. This 
is yet another plot from Kaplan at all. Um, which shows another sweep over hyperparameters for 
differently sized models. Um, and once again, you see regardless of kind of the size of your model, 
roughly speaking, the optimum aspect ratio is fairly similar and they live at about 100, maybe a 
little bit less depending on how you want to do the accounting, but really, you know, anywhere near 
100 is a pretty safe bet for aspect ratios. um EK and others uh did a number of really interesting 
sort of like architecture um uh architecture variation experiments in which their general 
conclusion on this was that let's look at the top panel here you have a lot of different kinds of 
uh models that you can have in terms of depth to width trade-offs um but as you sort of sweep the 
depth to width trade-offs you find that really um the only thing that matters in some sense is 
flops as you increase the flops the models get And that's really controlling the majority of the 
effects, not necessarily uh the aspect ratio. And so I think what has really emerged from this is 
the sense that there's a general forgiving band of hyperparameters that people tend to choose and 
then you really worry about primarily your systems utilization rather than sort of expressiveness 
concerns which are hard to reason about. Cool. Um okay. And then maybe the last hyperparameter 
thing uh that I want to mention is vocabulary sizes. Um and this one's kind of interesting to me 
because there's a really clear difference between two classes of models. Um I think in the early 
days of a lot of you know um uh early days of open-source model training um there were a lot of 
monolingual models whose only goal was to be good on English. And for those models, you had these 
like much smaller vocab size in the 30,000 range. Um, and then post llama, a lot of people were 
really interested in multilingual or like production system. So these include closed source models 
like GBD4. Um, all these have much much larger vocab sizes. And these are roughly in the 100 to 
200,000 um, vocab range. And you see generally that you know Google models have a ton more vocab. 
um llama derivatives roughly range at about a 100 uh thousand tokens and then the the sort of 
monolingual models are about 30,000. Um this is somewhat clear. The multilingual models really do 
need much larger vocab to cover the whole space. Generally the models on the right are also bigger. 
There have been scaling laws studies showing that the bigger your model, the larger the vocab can 
handle. And so this is also partially driven by uh modern scaling trends where the models on the 
right are generally bigger. No one's training small uh sorry large monolingual models uh anymore. 
Okay. So um yeah >> models like style stuff like how do you see those sizes? >> Sorry the question 
was like if you have sorry multilingual models or sorry >> multimodal >> multimodal yeah so I guess 
it depends on the way that your tokens are encoded but you know if you're tokenizing your images 
and things like that then you need to you know have many more tokens to account for those. Um if 
you look at like various open source releases they'll have like a different image tokenizer with 
its own vocab which is quite large. >> Yeah. >> How valid is it to compare um I suppose bits by 
bites for different >> um how valid is it to compare bits? Oh that is a great question. Okay. Yeah. 
Uh that's not a hyper primary question but that is a good question. Um so uh what is the right way? 
Okay. Okay. So, so let me let me like step back a moment and like put us in the right mindset. So, 
if we think about language modeling, language modeling is is a generative modeling task, right? We 
are modeling the probability of a sequence. Now, as long as your sequence is fixed, right? It's the 
same. You haven't, you know, adulterated it anyway. And you provide a probability over all strings. 
That's always valid to compare, right? At that level of things, it's always valid. Now when you ask 
the question is it valid to compare the bits per bite of uh arbitrary token or two arbitrary 
tokenizers really there's two things at play. The one thing is you know did you touch the sequence 
at all like if you look at some tokenizers in the past before subword tokenizers they would drop 
some tokens or drop some words that changes that makes the comparisons invalid but modern 
tokenizers are complete they can model any sequence so that's not a concern. Um the other thing 
that you have to worry about is are we like length normalizing in any way right but for bits per 
bite you're always normalizing with the same number which is the number of bytes and so this is 
always a valid comparison right so that's kind of how to think about you know tokenizer comparisons 
>> so for example I think results showing that comparity for fixed tokenizers is is is um always 
leads to to better on even at the I think they improve for >> um perplexity and BPV are kind of 
dual to each other. So yes, if that's what you're asking, >> it's only yes, it's only no because if 
you're comparing, >> you could you could frame comparing a different >> Okay, we'll have to we'll 
have to talk later because I'm not sure I understand the question, but I think that that's an 
interesting set of questions. Okay, good. Okay. All right. So, um, you know, we're we're going 
through really the the lowlevel lowest levels of details of language modeling, which I think is 
really exposes a lot of interesting ideas while we sort of talk through this. And I think dropout 
is one of the and regularization I think is another very interesting class of ideas. Also, one that 
I think is very counterintuitive from your machine learning 101 intuition. So let's uh go through 
what I think is like the the standard argument for you know regularization. Um well if I'm doing 
language modeling I have a lot of data right I have more data than I can process most of the time 
right unless you're at you know Google maybe even then there is more internet data than there is 
flops so you know I'm probably not even going to see the same data twice right um so I'm only going 
to do a single pass on a corpus and there's very good reasons and arguments to believe that a 
single pass of SGD or other optimizers is never really going to memorize my data very much right so 
this means overfitting is not really a problem uh almost ever during compute constrained language 
model web. Now you know some people even actually only look at training loss because they believe 
so strongly that overfitting doesn't happen in single pass SGD. Now given this you know you can 
sort of sit and think about this should I use dropout or weight decay in language model training 
right okay you can think about it a bit um you know one unfortunate thing is that a lot of recent 
models don't talk about this stuff at all um it's really lower level details than like tech reports 
are willing to expose um but if you look actually you find a lot of models um do both especially 
weight decay actually is a fairly popular intervention even for modern high performance language 
models. Um this is very very surprising you know I mean some of the dropout things um you know 
maybe uh have gone out of favor but weight decay actually remains fairly popular and this is very 
mystifying like why is this um and this is you know one of the reasons why I think deep learning is 
hard and this architecture lecture is very strange and hard um it's because these things interact 
in very strange ways so there have been papers that have argued um and shown nice evidence that 
weight decay is actually not a regularizer. Sometimes it actually interacts with the optimizer to 
essentially um make optimization better. Um so if you look at the training versus validation loss 
across different weight decay settings on you know language model training for single pass SGD, you 
don't really see any difference like weight decay isn't shifting things. So the validation loss is 
better. There's already no overfitting. We're on the x equals y line here, right? So, doesn't 
control overfitting. But if we kind of look at different levels of weight decay and not only just 
different levels of weight decay, we look at weight decay combined with learning rate decay. Um 
what we find is that the stronger weight decay runs, these blue dash lines on the bottom, you know, 
do significantly better because they start out slow, but they essentially end up um converging to a 
much better minimum later. And this is, you know, generally true when we decay learning rate, not 
necessarily true when we're in constant learning rate, which is maybe somewhat more of where your 
intuition is coming from. So you know this is part of why it's very difficult to reason sort of a 
priori or like from scratch you know the behavior of all these different choices and why you know I 
think Percy and I have designed this class so that you interact with stuff because you know you 
might come upon this thing that where basically weight decay is actually an optimization 
intervention and not necessarily a regularization intervention which is you know what you would 
expect here right so always keep that in mind that these kinds of unexpected effects can really 
start to kick in uh for these kinds of uh settings. Cool. All right. So, to put everything together 
for hyperparameters, there's actually for you know, a lot of the the maybe more hairy looking 
hyperparameters actually just fairly standard choices that have worked well for everybody, right? 
You know, factor a four rule of thumb, keep your head dim and your number of heads uh equal to the 
model dimension. Um pick an aspect ratio roughly around 100. Um and you know if you ask about 
regularization right you want to maybe try a couple things because regularization actually does 
interact with optimizers in ways that are quite counterintuitive right so this is a thing that some 
people uh still do even though you don't need the regularization at all actually maybe I'll stop 
here in case yeah >> are there any significant architectural differences maybe for like diffusion 
model >> diffusions that I have not looked into enough to be honest um there aren't that many 
people training big diffusions is one issue. Um and many of the models that have been trained are 
retrofitted. So I think the architectures are actually the same as the you know like a llama like 
model. Um but if you're asking the question of like what's the optimal architecture if you were to 
train from scratch? I don't know what that is actually off top my head. >> Yeah. >> Do you have an 
explanation for why regularization optimization? >> Well I guess it's not that regularization in 
general affects optimization. I don't think people do dropout anymore because you know it doesn't 
really uh interact well with optimization. For example, weight decay, you know, which is shrinkage 
to zero. Um, that might allow you to use a higher learning rate or it might allow you to decay 
faster. There are lots of ways in which all these terms are interrelated. Cool. Okay. Now, I've 
talked a lot about how to design um expressive models by sort of looking at all these other models 
that have been trained. Um, one of the things that I'll I'll highlight now is over the last few 
years, um, a really big emphasis has not been on performance alone. It has actually been on 
stability. And this becomes an increasingly important concern as your models get more and more 
expensive to train, right? Um, we've kind of seen that a lot of these choices are forgiving, right? 
Everyone's kind of doing similar stuff. And so, you know, you can mess with these, but you're not 
going to get a big performance difference. That's fine. But if your model, you know, suddenly blows 
up some part into training, like you get these like horrible looking spikes all over the place, um, 
you know, you might end up with a model that is, you know, actually not very good quality, right? 
Or it might be unreoverable. You might have spent, you know, millions of dollars in training and, 
you know, you get to a point where the model is no longer able to be trained any further, right? 
That would be a horrible thing to happen if you have a lot of compute that you want to spend. So 
you don't want to train models that look kind of like this blue curve with like spikes everywhere 
and these you know big gradient norms happening. Um so what do we do to fix these stability issues? 
I mean this is really I would say like a core core issue. And you know if you have stability issues 
in language models or in general neural networks there's a few you know usual suspects that you've 
got to start looking at. Um one of them is the soft maxes. And the softmax has two things that are 
both really bad for stability. One of them is an exponential, right? We can see how that blows up 
very quickly. Um, you also divide two numbers and that's also a potentially very dangerous 
operation, right? So a soft max is one place where you got to be extra extra careful. And where are 
the soft maxes in a language model? Well, there's two of them. There's one on the output side when 
we output our probability distribution. And then in attention, when we normalize the attention, 
there's going to be another soft max, right? So we can think of both of those as really kind of 
danger zones for our model. Um especially the attention u but okay let's start with thinking about 
the output softmax. The output softmax can blow up on us. Um and one of the things that we can do 
is we can try to control um sort of the the normalizer problem. So you know let's sort of think 
about the softmax calculation. We want to compute a log probability to compute the loss. Now what 
is the log probability? Well, it's you know the output of your model U and then you've got this log 
normalizer, right? This U is well behaved because in some sense this is the output of your model, 
right? This is just the output of your residual stream with all the things that are added in. So if 
u is well behaved, then log P, the first term is well behaved, right? If the model is being okay. 
Now the second term, this log Z, this might not be so okay, right? If Z is really big or really 
small, even if the output of your model is somewhat well behaved, it could blow up. And what is Z? 
Well, it's an exponential, right? So, it could potentially blow up very quickly on you. Or if this 
is zero, it could also blow up on you, right? So, both of those directions are very, very bad. Now, 
we would ideally like our Z to be somewhere near one, right? Um or log Z to be somewhere near zero. 
Um what can we do? Well, one of the things that you notice, right, if you sort of thought about the 
action of the softmax is this whole thing is overparameterized, right? Um, I could sort of push 
things in and out. So, if I add a constant to u, I can manipulate the z's without really affecting 
the output of the softmax, right? It can cancel out between the normalizer and sort of the output 
of my model. So, because of that property, one thing that I could do is I could add a regularizer. 
Um this is from from Jacob Develin's paper 2024 sorry 2014. Um in which he adds sort of this 
squared log Z term um and what this is doing is it's just penalizing how far away your log z is 
from zero. And if log z is near zero that's nice because this whole expression is kind of 
numerically stable. This is called the zloss trick. Um it's been used by a number of papers. um 
Jacob Develin and others uh sort of popular or initially pioneered this back in 2014 and then it's 
become popular again through a number of open- source models like Bichuan I think was the first 
open source model to do it but then DCLM and OMO and others have been using this trick to stabilize 
their output softmaxes so this is this is a surprisingly effective thing now okay so let's say 
we've handled the instability issues on the output softmax now we have to sort of turn our 
attention towards the other potential problem which is attention right and this is a a place where 
lots of degeneracies happen lots of techniques have been developed to control the instability that 
attention uh operations generate um and really the you know the high level thing that I'll say is 
if you have instability if you can throw a layer norm in there somehow it might control it and 
that's really in some sense the the design philosophy behind this idea called the QK norm um so 
what you do is remember that we have you know our Q's and K's um that are going to be multiplied 
together and then they're going to go into the softmax right so in the standard attention operation 
I'm going to layer norm as a prelayer norm multiply with a QKV and I'm going to get my Q's and K's 
those will get multiplied by a matrix multiply I'll softmax them and I'll multiply that with V to 
get the weighted average and then I'll output whatever comes after right so this is our usual 
attention now what happens if we just throw in a layer norm before we multiply the Q's and K's. If 
we do that, then we know that the inputs to this matrix multiply and therefore the inputs to the 
soft max roughly have the same scale. They're always going to have a scale of roughly one because 
we've, you know, uh, used RMS norm to divide the size of those Q's and K's. Okay, if we do that, 
then, you know, we're kind of going to keep this softmax operation stable. Tons of different models 
do this. It's originally from um the multimodal world. Um you know some folks who were doing making 
multimodal models sort of initially discovered Qkorm. um Edifix and Chameleon really, you know, 
used this and like proved it out and then a number of other uh open source language models, you 
know, realized that the same tricks are entirely applicable to um stabilizing attention for 
language models. And I think this is now very very standard like QKROM is actually a very standard 
intervention that most of the large models now introduce. um it doesn't seem to affect performance 
um from lots of different training runs, but it does definitely prevent the kinds of um attention 
degeneracies. Um and you know, I'm really the the way that I've seen this is, you know, we have 
layer norms initially in the pre-orm. Now we add them after the the uh nonlinearities in each 
block, and now we're throwing them in both the Q's and the K's. And really I think this is this is 
kind of getting at um the stabilization tricks that people apply to this world. Okay. Now um the 
final set of things that I'll talk about as a stability intervention and frankly this one is not as 
popular and more of a of a Google specific trick that I've seen. Um but uh loit soft capping is a 
much harder intervention that some people apply. So this one um you know in Qk norm what we're 
doing is we are controlling the inputs the soft max and sort of hoping that the outputs are well 
behaved. If we really really want to enforce um well behaved outputs what we can do is we can kind 
of take the logets the things that go straight into the softmax and we can just cap them off so 
they can never be too large or too small. Right? This is a hard almost a hard constraint. Um it's 
called a soft cap of course but a tanh you know is bounded at some value. Um and so uh this is in 
the GMA models. Um I think both GMA or like GMAS 2, three and four all use the lowjet soft cap 
trick. Um and what they do is they take all of their low jets for the attention layers and then 
they soft cap them at some value. Um some NVIDIA folks have done actually quite nice work doing 
systematic comparisons of these stability interventions. Um and what they find is um if you start 
with a baseline model, you can do all sorts of different interventions and QK norm is here and it 
does slightly better due to the fact that you can crank up the learning rate a little bit. Um but 
if you do soft capping alone, you actually end up losing performance. So there is a a quality 
degradation that happens. This is a very strong intervention. You can never express very confident 
uh signals in your softmax beyond a certain point. Um, so it does have some negative consequences, 
but this is a very safe way of stabilizing the outputs of your attention or sorry the the inputs to 
your attention, the low jets that go into the softmax. Okay, so that's kind of the end of the 
stability components. Um, I can pause for a moment here. Um, and I'll talk about sort of various 
attention things um after that. Cool. Okay. All right. So the last thing I want to talk about today 
is various interventions that you can make your attention. Um and as I was saying at the beginning 
of this lecture um I'm only going to talk about all the things that you can do to sort of dance all 
by all attention today. So if you if you were interested in hearing about state space models or 
linear time attention um sadly today is not the day for you. Um the things that I do want to talk 
about which are really commonly implemented um attention interventions today are uh group query 
attention which really saves your inference costs by reducing the number of heads um and sparer 
sliding window attention um which really originally came from the GPT3ish family but have now 
really been adopted widely by most models that are looking to do uh long context unless they're 
doing exotic uh SSM stuff. So I'll start with um group query attention or GQA or MQA. Um this I'm 
going to first set up the need for these kinds of things and then you'll kind of hopefully see what 
the what the trick is um and why it's fairly natural. So for the moment we've been talking about 
you know training and modeling and all these things but like let's take a pause and now let's think 
about deployment right you've trained this very big model and now you need to serve it to lots of 
users and you're going to pay a cost for serving and you're going to have to in abstract sense pay 
for two different resources right you're going to have to pay for your flops right the computation 
that you're performing but you also have to pay for another thing you have to pay for your memory 
accesses right because the memory accesses are also going to impact you know your systems 
characteristics your latency your utilization right so you want both of these things to be small 
now let's think about what happens during training or uh alternatively prefill when you're looking 
at your prompt where someone gives you the stuff in this case you know the total arithmetic 
operations you have is you know order of magnitude batch size sequence length hidden dim squared 
right that's roughly the size of things that you get and of course you know we're doing quadratic 
attention so we've got d² square. Um we've got uh total memory accesses like what is our memory 
access that we have here. Um we have batch time sequence length times uh hidden dim plus um the 
sort of cost of the soft max which has a n squ component and then we've got a d squ component um 
for the for the projections. So the arithmetic intensity here is pretty good. Um it's going to be 
one over k. This is the number of heads. So you need to have um sorry head dims. So your head dims 
need to be big enough that you're multiplying some reasonably sized matrices. And you've got a one 
over BN. So your sequences need to be long enough or your batch sizes need to be big enough. As 
long as both of these are true, your GPUs are going to be fully utilized. Great. Right? You're 
you're using all of your resources. Now you know we have done we have finished training and now 
we're serving our users. How do we serve our users? We're going to generate tokens and send it to 
them. Right? Now, if we're doing that, um, I can't parallelize the generation process. What I'm 
going to do is I'm going to generate a token. I'm going to condition on it. I'm going to generate 
the next token, and I'm going to repeat this process one by one. Right? This is just sort of the 
the curse of auto reggressive language modeling. We have to do this. Um, in order to do this, the 
efficient way to do it is to maintain all of the sort of past keys and queries that I've had in 
what's called a KV cache. So, the KV cache is going to maintain this matrix of, you know, Q.K K 
over the past and then whenever I need to compute something new I can reuse sort of the the 
submatrices that I've already had from the past and I only really need to compute sort of the new 
um query key interactions that I need to fill out the rest of this matrix. Right? So every 
submatrix I've computed before I can keep. I only need to compute my new one. So this saves a lot 
on compute. Right? That's great. But the issue here is now our arithmetic intensity is not so good. 
Right? As you might sort of intuit it, this KV cache approach is going to be reading and and 
reading um parameters all the time. Right? Each time I have a new step, right? I'm going to have to 
read in my parameters. I'm going to have to take these dotproducts and I'm going to do this once 
every step. And so now what do I have? Well, you know, my total memory act sorry, my total 
arithmetic operations are the same. I'm multiplying the same matrices still, right? Just 
incrementally rather than all at once. But because I'm doing this incrementally, you know, now I 
have um a memory access pattern of batch by sequence squared by hidden dim plus um sequence by 
hidden dim squared. And the second term is not so pleasant, right? It used to be that it was just d 
^ 2, but now we've got n * d ^ 2. And if we compute the arithmetic intensity which is the ratio of 
these two guys um now we have n / d + 1 over b. So now what we need is large batches plus short 
sequence length or we need really big model dimensions. So if we want to serve a small model 
efficiently, this is not so good, right? Um this is really difficult to deal with, right? This n / 
d term, this first term over here, which is sequence length over hidden dim, is very difficult to 
reduce if we're doing this incremental computation. Um this is just a hard thing to deal with. So 
this leads to this idea of MQA or multi-query attention. Normally you have multiple heads in your 
attention uh operation and you're going to have different keys, different values and different 
queries. That's normally how you do things. But one thing that we could do is maybe we can keep the 
K's and the V's the same across all the heads. And the only thing that's different across the heads 
are the queries. If we do this, then this drastically removes the amount of um items that need to 
be moved in and out of memory, right? because the KV cache right are now significantly smaller. 
These are all shared across all the heads. Um this significantly reduces the total memory access as 
well as the arithmetic intensity and we're kind of um the key term that we were talking about here. 
We had the n / d term. Now we have uh h multiplying this right and so this h term um allows us to 
significantly reduce the uh the sorry increase the arithmetic intensity if we have a lot of heads. 
Right? This is a significant gain over what we had uh before. So this gets us significant 
efficiency improvements. But the issue with MQA is uh this is on the right here. You have one value 
in one key for all these queries. You do in fact lose significant expressive power if you do this. 
Um and so there's this trade-off between systems efficiency and expressiveness. And you might 
wonder is there sort of a sweet spot in which we can avoid trading off you know quite a 
significantly um expressive power and computation and that's where GQA or grouped query attention 
comes in. You know the original transformer is multi head. We have queries and keys for each head. 
In multi-query we have one key and value for each for all the heads. In grouped query we reduce the 
amount of keys and values but we keep the number of queries the same. So we now have this ratio 
that we can play with which is kind of the number of key heads or the number of value heads um 
while keeping the total number of heads much larger than that. So this allows us to very simply 
control the the uh trade-offs between expressiveness and inference efficiency. Um there are other 
sort of tricks from deepseat v2 u multi headladen attention um that I'll sort of mention briefly uh 
next time um which sort of have a different kind of factorization structure in a different set of 
trade-offs but really um the nice thing about GQA is that in practice the trade-off is quite 
favorable. So if you have multi head your performance this was you know in the uh I think T5 days 
if I remember right um this is your uh downstream model performance this is your time per sample 
you want to reduce this as much as possible with multi head attention you have best performance but 
very high cost um with MQA you know you have lower uh cost but much lower performance similarly if 
you make your model smaller to try to hit your performance targets you get much worse performance 
GQA really does get the best of both worlds, you know, very low inference cost, uh nearly the same 
performance as your full multi head. Um and you see sort of this like uh GQA group structure where 
if you have um a small reduction in the number of heads, um you basically have most of the gains in 
your performance, which allows you to sort of keep most of the expressive power um while getting 
significant uh inference improvements. And Percy will talk a bunch more about sort of the inference 
mechanics later. Um but sort of this should give you a flavor of like why models today almost all 
adopt this GQA uh structure because it gives you a lot of this inference cost which is really 
critical um without very much of a uh uh expressiveness hit. >> Cool. Any questions for for GQA or 
KVach? But uh given that you have so many like rules of thumbs for what hyperparameters are good 
like to what extent are you still searching over hyperparameters versus exploiting these rules of 
>> I think it's a mix of both. I think every sort of model training run has some thesis about what 
can be varied. Um and so you see this in a lot of the reports where I think the hyperparameters are 
often not where people are touching too much. Um but you see like architecture changes like one at 
a time um in a lot of these reports but it's very rare to like go and change everything up. I think 
Google is one of the only orgs that seems to like really spice things up in a significant way. Um 
the GMA series has done some pretty interesting things. Um the most recent GMA 4 release for 
example now has like uh individual embedding for every layer um in a way to control the trade-offs 
between like memory use and flops. It's a very interesting set of things that they've done. Oh 
yeah, back there. There >> been experiments with like dynamically altering some of these uh 
parameters during training. >> During training um let me see weight decay. Yes, weight decay people 
change in concert with like learning rate. Um that is actually a heristic that people do um that 
works very well. Um, other than that, I don't know if there's a lot of different hypers that people 
change during training, especially because the architecture ones just make training incompatible. 
So, you can't really, you know, change them while you're you're training. Um, yeah. So, I think I 
think weight decay is probably the one that I can think of. The others are usually fixed. >> Yeah. 
>> MQA is a uh it's not just inference time fix. It's a pledge of training. >> That's right. Yeah. 
you you you train with a certain number of beats. Yeah. Cool. Okay. The last thing I'll talk about 
is uh sliding window attention which is a really old idea like you know GPG3 used actually this uh 
you know if you read the paper they'll say we alternate between full attention which where every 
position can attend to everyone in the past and abandoned matrix uh style tension where you can 
attend to everyone within a fixed window. Um and you know OpenAI has some early work on these kinds 
of like different kinds of attention patterns that you can use. Um but actually this has become 
really really popular over the past year. Um this idea of alternating you know the big full 
attention and a more local attention actually hits a sweet spot for how to manage like long context 
performance while not paying too much for inference. Um I think you know the more recent revival in 
open models I would maybe say uh coher command A was the first one I saw do it where they you know 
had this like structure where every four layers they would have a full attention that attended to 
everything. The three layers in between would use a sliding window attention that would only be 
able to look at local structure. And of course you know as you go up um sorry in this case down 
because they ordered the the diagram the other way. As you go down sort of these blocks, you know, 
you're aggregating local information into global ones. The local attentions at the end can of 
course access more global information. But this, you know, allows you to manage the um the the cost 
of having a really long context without having to go for something like uh a state space model or 
more exotic intervention. And that's worked quite well. Um there's also some innovation where um 
people change the uh embedding format for the long range information where they get rid of things 
like um rope so you have no position embeddings at all. So you're really looking almost at bags. Um 
where the short range information still gets position information. Um so people do all sorts of you 
know uh kinds of interventions involving these these uh both the embeddings and alternating local 
and global structure. Um I'll say that this is a you know attention and in general how to manage 
the trade-off between um long context and sort of long context cost and performance is a still an 
active area of investigation. It's a place where the most architecture work and changes are still 
being done. Um we see essentially a bunch of other models adopt this idea. Llama 4, most recently 
gamma 43 they all do um this combination of sliding window attention and full tension. uh in their 
case using full rope instead of uh nope as the um embedding. So as I said um this is becoming 
really really popular. Um Quen 3.5 which I've put on the right they're actually a little bit 
different because they alternate a state space model um called gated delta and a full attention uh 
every sort of you know one full attention every four layer every four layers. Um so it's the same 
alternating structure but they're using a different sort of cheap layer. In their case, they're 
using a state space model. I'll explain what that is uh next lecture instead of a sliding window 
sort of local attention. But you see this is like I think a new theme over the past year where you 
know open models are really trying to grapple with long context performance. And the way to do that 
at least so far is to have these hybrid models that aren't just global attention, aren't just cheap 
attention. There's some sort of mix in between. And that's that seems to have worked very well so 
far in a lot of these models. Okay, cool. So, as I was sort of trying to emphasize, when you look 
across all of these models, you start to see a lot of patterns and hopefully a sense of general 
understanding about what things you can do and what things are good defaults. Um, we also see a lot 
of differences in how we handle context, and how we handle position embeddings. Um, even 
tokenization, there's some differences, right? So there are differences across these models, but 
there's also commonalities that hopefully now give you some intuition as you go out and do your 
assignments and and sort of uh mess with the leaderboard and so on. Thanks.